# Methodology

As mentioned in the [Ideology](README.md#ideology) section, a core ideal of this system is to allow users to own their files, with minimal
intrusion from the system. As such, all these guidelines are completely malleable to the user's preferences. Some tradeoffs had to be made,
and the ones that made sense for the author's particular file situation may not make sense for you. Some ideas for modifications are listed
[here](#modifications) to get you started.

## Data vs. Software
One of the core principles of the Library Distict Methodology (LDM) is a separation of *data* and *software*.

For the purposes of this project, they will be defined as follows:
* Data encompasses files and folders primarily composed of information useful to humans, including through the use of software.
  Any information you "wouldn't want to lose."
* Software includes information primarily used by computers:
    * Programs and applications provided by third-party developers;
    * Files generated algorithmically by said programs, for the primary purpose of aiding the computer execute its tasks.

LDM aims to place all user data organized within the top-level `library` folder, instead of scattered throughout folders like `Documents`,
`Desktop`, `AppData`, and more. The purpose of this is to make it easy to create backups or move data to a new computer, without having to
search through many directories. This strategy also can save backup storage space, as it limits the copying of files which can be reinstalled
or recreated on a different computer.

LDM only intends to organize user data; software is often located in many different directories by default.

### Examples
* Photo and video collections are user data, because they exist to be viewed by users via media software.
* Video game save files, although generated algorithmically, are user data, as they are the user's creation through the use of software.
* Anything installed via a package manager, such as `apt`, `dnf`, or the Microsoft Store, are software. They can be reinstalled with minimal
  user data loss, potentially excluding user settings.
* Files automatically generated by compilers and build tools are considered software, as they can be identically restored as long as the source
  code (user data) is intact.

### Exceptions
Sometimes, it is difficult beyond the bounds of practicality to completely separate data and software. For example, while working on a programming
project, it can seem unreasonable (depending on tooling) to have to build in a completely different root directory than the source code. For example,
using `cargo` builds in `<root>/target`, from the code in `<root>/src`, which is very efficient for executing the code, as the compilation and
execution can be done in the same directory.

In these cases, it is generally acceptable to leave the generated software inside the user data (`library`) folder. A provided cleaning script uses
`.gitignore`-like syntax to automatically remove these generated files. In this example, the rule `library/dev/active/my-rust/target` could be used.
This script can be run before backups and data transfers to significantly reduce the amount of data being copied.

## File Hierarchy

In line with the ideal of ease of separation between data and software, it is recommended to place these main folders in very obvious (and quickly
typeable) locations, like `~/`, `Desktop`, or as the root of a completely separate partition just for user data.

```
library/
├─ topic1/
│  ├─ holds/
│  ├─ active/
│  ├─ shelves/
│  ├─ media/
│  ├─ external/
│  ├─ archive.7z
├─ topic2/
│  ├─ ...
projects/
├─ ...
scripts/
├─ ...
```

### Library
The top-level `library` folder is the main location for user data, and contains a set of topics. Each topic has six subfolders: `holds`, `active`,
`shelves`, `media`, `external`, and `archive.7z` (which is a compressed archive, rather than a true directory). These topics can be generated by
running `scripts/new-topic.*` Some of these can be further organized into subtopics if desired.

#### Holds
These include projects and ideas you would like to complete in the future, but are not being currently worked on.

#### Active
Projects which are being actively worked on are placed in this folder. These can be automatically linked to the top-level `projects` directory
with `scripts/new-project.*`.

#### Shelves
This includes items which are "shelved," and can be organized with or without subtopics. Completed projects should be moved here via
`scripts/complete-project.*`. These items are "ongoing," meaning they might get modified occasionally, but are not "active." Examples include
long-term budgets or large projects with multiple smaller projects in `holds` and `active`.

#### Media
`media` maintains photos, videos, audio files, and similar which are not necessarily directly related to a subtopic. It includes media both
created by the user (such as a personal photo gallery) and external media (like downloaded playlists).

Media is special because during [backups](#Backups), it does not get compressed. Media files are usually well-compressed by default, so
compressing them externally is essentially a waste of compute time.

#### External
Resources not made by the user, but by other people, should go here. These files may or may not be organized in subtopics, and generally are
some kind of documents, like how-to guides, novels, or academic papers.

#### Archive
The archive contains copies of the `shelves` and `external` directories, and individual files and subtopics from those folders can be moved
into the archive. The user can decide when to archive files, but generally if the file is part of a completed topic that is not being modified,
it should probably be archived. Items in `held` and `active` should first be moved to the shelves before being archived, as their semantics
conflict with an archive.

## Backups
The goal of this method is to make backups take close to the minimum amount of storage space, while making them much faster as well. If the user
does not care how long the backup takes, it is simpler to simple compress the entire `library` folder altogether.

It is recommended to create backups by using the provided scripts to compress each subfolder of each topic, excepting [`media`](#media): `holds`,
`active`, `shelves`, `external` (`archive.7z` is already compressed). If the user desires to have the backup be one file, it is recommended to
use `tar` without compression in order to speed up the process, as all files are already compressed (either through external 7-Zip compression or
`media` files' original compression)

### Compression
[7-Zip](https://7-zip.org/) is the recommended compression method, for a mixture of cross-platform compatability and good compression ratios,
but other compression methods can also be used. Currently, the scripts only support 7-Zip, but they can be modified by users to use others.